>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JUNE 17:
A U.S. NAVY SHIP COLLIDES WITH A
CONTAINER SHIP OFF THE COAST OFF
JAPAN.
MISTRIAL IN THE BILL COSBY
SEXUAL ASSAULT TRIAL.
AND, IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
OBAMACARE IN ALABAMA.
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN ONLY ONE
INSURANCE COMPANY OFFERS A PLAN?
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
SEVEN AMERICAN SAILORS REMAIN
UNACCOUNTED FOR, FOLLOWING A
PRE-DAWN COLLISION BETWEEN THEIR
SHIP AND A CONTAINER SHIP OFF
THE COAST OF JAPAN.
IT HAPPENED IN CLEAR WEATHER,
BUT UNDER DARKNESS, 65 MILES
SOUTHWEST OF YOKOSUKA, WHEN THE
GUIDED MISSILE DESTROYER U.S.S.
"FITZGERALD" COLLIDED WITH A
COMMERCIAL CONTAINER SHIP FOUR
TIMES ITS SIZE.
THE NAVY SAYS THE "FITZGERALD"
SUFFERED "SIGNIFICANT DAMAGE" ON
ITS RIGHT SIDE, INCLUDING THE
SECTION WHERE SOME OF THE
270-MEMBER CREW HAD BEEN ASLEEP.
THE NAVY PUMPED OUT WATER THAT
FLOODED THE SHIP, AND ALONG WITH
THE JAPANESE COAST GUARD,
SCOURED THE PACIFIC FOR THE
MISSING SAILORS.
THE NAVY SAID THE MISSING
SAILORS COULD HAVE BEEN TRAPPED
INSIDE THE FITZGERALD.
THE NAVY AIRLIFTED TWO OTHER
SAILORS AND THE SHIP'S CAPTAIN
TO A HOSPITAL FOR MEDICAL
TREATMENT.
THE FITZGERALD WAS LATER TOWED
BACK TO ITS BASE AT YOKOSUKA.
THE DAMAGED, FILIPINO-FLAGGED
CONTAINER SHIP HAS ARRIVED IN
TOKYO.
NONE OF ITS CREW WAS INJURED.
THE U.S. MILITARY SAYS SEVEN
AMERICAN SOLDIERS WERE WOUNDED
TODAY WHEN AFGHAN SOLDIERS FIRED
ON THEM AT AN AFGHAN ARMY BASE
IN THE NORTHERN CITY OF MAZAR-I-
SHARIF.
IN RETURN FIRE, ONE OF THE
ATTACKERS WAS KILLED, AND
ANOTHER, WOUNDED.
THIS IS THE SECOND SO-CALLED
INSIDER ATTACK IN THE PAST WEEK.
AN AFGHAN SOLDIER KILLED THREE
AMERICANS IN EASTERN NANGARHAR
PROVINCE LAST SATURDAY.
LONDON POLICE SAY THE NUMBER OF
PEOPLE PRESUMED DEAD FROM
WEDNESDAY'S MASSIVE FIRE IN A
24-FLOOR APARTMENT BUILDING HAS
RISEN TO 58, BUT IT COULD TAKE
WEEKS TO RECOVER AND IDENTIFY
ALL THE VICTIMS.
TODAY, BRITISH PRIME MINISTER
THERESA MAY MET WITH
15 SURVIVORS AND EMERGENCY
RESPONDERS TO THE FIRE, EVEN AS
UP TO 2,000 PROTESTERS GATHERED
OUTSIDE 10 DOWNING STREET, SOME
SAYING HER GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE
HAS BEEN LACKING.
THE PENNSYLVANIA JUDGE IN THE
BILL COSBY SEXUAL ASSAULT TRIAL
DECLARED A MISTRIAL TODAY, AFTER
THE HUNG JURY SAID IT COULD NOT
REACH A UNANIMOUS VERDICT
FOLLOWING SIX DAYS OF
DELIBERATIONS.
COSBY HAD NO COMMENT AS HE LEFT
THE COURTHOUSE, AND REMAINS FREE
ON $1 MILLION BAIL.
HE DID NOT TESTIFY IN HIS OWN
DEFENSE.
DISTRICT ATTORNEY KEVIN STEELE
SAID HE'LL RE-TRY THE 79-YEAR-
OLD ACTOR AND COMEDIAN, THOUGH
IT'S UNCLEAR WHEN A NEW TRIAL
COULD BEGIN.
THE JURY DEADLOCKED ON CHARGES
THAT COSBY DRUGGED AND MOLESTED
TEMPLE UNIVERSITY EMPLOYEE
ANDREA CONSTAND AT HIS HOME IN
2004.
18 PEOPLE WERE ARRESTED IN
PROTESTS LAST NIGHT FOLLOWING
THE ACQUITTAL OF JERONIMO YANEZ,
THE MINNESOTA POLICE OFFICER WHO
SHOT AND KILLED MOTORIST
PHILANDO CASTILE DURING A
TRAFFIC STOP LAST JULY.
APPROXIMATELY 2,000 PROTESTERS
MARCHED DOWN THE STREETS OF
SAINT PAUL.
THE ARRESTS CAME WHEN THEY
BLOCKED TRAFFIC ON INTERSTATE
94.
DURING THE TRIAL, YANEZ
TESTIFIED HE HAD FEARED FOR HIS
LIFE WHEN HE SHOT CASTILE FIVE
TIMES, AFTER CASTILE HAD ALERTED
HIM HE WAS CARRYING A GUN, WITH
A PERMIT TO DO SO.
THE CASE GAINED NATIONAL
ATTENTION WHEN CASTILE'S
GIRLFRIEND, WHO WAS IN THE CAR
ALONG WITH HER DAUGHTER, LIVE-
STREAMED THE AFTERMATH OF THE
INCIDENT ON FACEBOOK.
DESPITE THE ACQUITTAL, THE CITY
OF SAINT ANTHONY FIRED YANEZ
YESTERDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WEEK, THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION SIGNED A
$12 BILLION DEAL TO SELL THE
PERSIAN GULF NATION OF QATAR
THREE DOZEN F-15 FIGHTER JETS
MADE BY BOEING.
THE DEAL COMES A WEEK AFTER
PRESIDENT TRUMP LABELED QATAR A
"FUNDER OF TERRORISM" IN THE
MIDDLE EAST.
FOR THAT REASON, SAUDI ARABIA,
EGYPT, AND OTHER ARAB NATIONS
HAVE SEVERED DIPLOMATIC TIES
WITH QATAR AND IMPOSED AN
ECONOMIC BOYCOTT.
YET, QATAR HAS ALSO BEEN A KEY
U.S. ALLY, WITH THE LARGEST U.S.
MILITARY BASE IN THE REGION,
HOSTING 10,000 TROOPS.
FOR MORE, I AM JOINED FROM
WASHINGTON BY "WALL STREET
JOURNAL" REPORTER JAY SOLOMON.
JAY, I'M A LITTLE CONFUSED BY MY
OWN COMMENTS HERE.
ARE THEY, ON THE ONE HAND, A
FUNDER OF TERRORISM AT THE
HIGHEST LEVELS, AS THE PRESIDENT
SAID, OR ARE WE SELLING THEM
FIGHTER JETS?
>> I MEAN, IT'S A VERY
COMPLICATED SITUATION FOR SURE.
YOU HAVE THE AL-UDEIED AIRBASE,
WHICH IS THE MAIN STAGING GROUND
FOR U.S. AIRSTRIKES AGAINST
ISLAMIC STATE IN SYRIA AND IRAQ.
YOU HAVE HUGE EXXON BUSINESS
INTERESTS IN QATAR.
YOU'VE HAD A LOT OF
COUNTERTERRORISM COOPERATION.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, THERE HAS
BEEN CONCERN GOING BACK YEARS
THAT THERE IS MONEY COMING FROM
QATAR THAT HAS REACHED AL QAEDA
ELEMENTS; THAT SINCE THE ARAB
SPRING, THEY'VE SUPPORTED
FACTIONS THAT ARE ALIGNED WITH
AL QAEDA ELEMENTS.
AND EVEN BACK TO THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION, A LOT OF CONCERN
THAT AL JAZEERA, ITS MAIN SOURCE
OF SOFT POWER, STIRS UP ANTI-
AMERICAN SENTIMENT AT TIMES, OR
STIRS UP SENTIMENT AGAINST
QATAR'S NEIGHBORS IN SAUDI
ARABIA AND THE U.A.E.
SO IT'S VERY MUCH A CONFLICTED
PICTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THIS WEEK,
IT SEEMS THOSE CONVERSATIONS
HAVE MOVED TO WASHINGTON, D.C.
THE SIDES ARE LOBBYING.
>> OH, IT'S AMAZING.
EVERY ONE OF THESE GOVERNMENTS--
SAUDI ARABIA, THE U.A.E.,
QATAR-- HAVE FLOODED THE ZONE,
AS SOME SAY, INTO WASHINGTON TO
MEET SECRETARY TILLERSON,
SECRETARY MATTIS, MEET PRASAD.
AND THESE COUNTRIES HAVE SO MUCH
INFLUENCE IN WASHINGTON THROUGH
INVESTMENTS AND THINK TANKS,
THROUGH LOBBYING FIRMS, JUST
THROUGH THEIR BUSINESS AND
DEFENSE CONTRACTS, THAT IT'S--
IT'S A VERY MUCH A CONFLICT
THAT'S PLAYING OUT HERE, AS MUCH
AS IT IS IN THE GULF.
AND EACH SIDE HAS REAL EQUITIES
THAT THEY BRING, AND I THINK
THAT'S PART OF THE REASON YOU'VE
SEEN SUCH MIXED MESSAGES FROM
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION.
AND I ALSO THINK THEY'RE HERE
BECAUSE THEY DON'T REALLY KNOW
EXACTLY WHAT THE TRUMP POSITION
IS BECAUSE HE'S SAID THINGS THAT
ON THE SURFACE APPEAR AT ODDS
WITH HIS SECRETARY OF STATE AND
HIS DEFENSE SECRETARY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THE
SECRETARY OF STATE HAS TRIED TO
KIND OF CALM THE TEMPERATURE
DOWN.
BUT THEN THE PRESIDENT SAYS WHAT
HE SAYS.
>> SECRETARY TILLERSON HAS BEEN
WORKING THE PHONES AGGRESSIVELY
OVER THE PAST WEEK AND MEETING
WITH FOREIGN MINISTERS FROM
THESE COUNTRIES, BASICALLY
SAYING THIS ECONOMIC SIEGE THAT
IS BEING PUSHED ON QATAR SHOULD
BE EASED.
AND THAT THERE'S A CONCERN THAT
COUNTER-ISIS OPERATIONS THAT ARE
RUN OUT OF AL-UDEID CAN BE
IMPACTED IF THIS FEUD DOESN'T
END.
SO HE'S VERY MUCH PUSHED THAT
LINE BACKED BY SECRETARY
TILLERSON.
THE PROBLEM IS, PRESIDENT TRUMP,
ON HIS TWEETS AND IN PUBLIC
COMMENTS, HAS SEEMED TO SIDE
WITH SAUDI ARABIA AND THE U.A.E.
AGAINST QATAR, SAYING, YOU
KNOW, THIS HIGH-LEVEL SUPPORT OF
TERRORISM THAT HAS BEEN
ALLEGEDLY SEEN.
>> Sreenivasan: HAS THIS
BREAK IN THE GULF ALLIANCE
CREATED AN OPPORTUNITY FOR IRAN?
BECAUSE WE WERE REPORTING THAT
THEY WERE ONE OF THE FIRST
PEOPLE THAT SENT FOOD-AID TO
QATAR.
WHAT'S HAPPENING WITH THAT?
>> NO, I THINK DEFINITELY,
BECAUSE PRESIDENT TRUMP, WHEN HE
WENT TO SAUDI ARABIA, HAS
BASICALLY BEEN TRYING TO CREATE
THIS BLOC OF GULF ARAB STATES
AGAINST ISIS, BUT ALSO AGAINST
IRAN.
AND IRAN'S LOVING THE FACT THAT
THERE'S THIS FEUD.
AND A LOT OF THESE COUNTRIES,
WHETHER IT'S QATAR, BAHRAIN, THE
U.A.E.-- I MEAN, THEY'RE PRETTY
VULNERABLE TO IRAN.
AND THIS HOPE OF NOT JUST THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION BUT THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION, AS WELL,
THAT THEY COULD CREATE A BLOC
AGAINST THESE SIX COUNTRIES IN
THAT REGION AGAINST IRAN, THESE
VERY VISIBLE FISSURES PLAY TO
IRAN'S ADVANTAGE.
THEY ARE PLAYING A VERY ASTUTE
DIPLOMATIC GAME, BECAUSE THIS
PLAYS INTO THEIR HANDS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
"WALL STREET JOURNAL'S" JAY
SOLOMON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FORMER PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
MANDATED THAT ALL AMERICANS
OBTAIN HEALTH INSURANCE AND
CREATED EXCHANGES TO HELP THE
UNINSURED ACQUIRE A PLAN.
BUT AFTER ONLY A FEW YEARS, BIG
INSURERS LIKE AETNA, ANTHEM, AND
UNITED HEALTH HAVE QUIT THE
EXCHANGES.
THIS YEAR, ONLY 57% OF OBAMACARE
ENROLLEES HAD A CHOICE OF THREE
OR MORE INSURERS, DOWN FROM 85%
LAST YEAR.
IN FIVE STATES, ENROLLEES NOW
HAVE ONLY ONE CHOICE.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER VISITED ONE OF THOSE
STATES, ALABAMA, TO ASSESS THE
IMPACT.
>> CHOCOLATE SAUCE OR CARAMEL
SAUCE?
WHICHEVER YOU WANT.
>> Reporter: OF ALL THE THINGS
SISTERS CAITLIN LYON AND
MICHELLE NOVOSEL HAD TO CONSIDER
BEFORE THEY OPENED THEIR
CHOCOLATE STORE IN HUNTSVILLE,
ALABAMA, HEALTHCARE CARRIED
PARTICULAR WEIGHT.
CAITLIN WOULD BE GIVING UP A
FULL-TIME GOVERNMENT CONTRACTING
JOB WITH GOOD BENEFITS.
>> THAT WAS ONE OF THE HUGE
CONSIDERATIONS IN LEAVING THAT
JOB, WAS NOT ONLY, YOU KNOW,
WAS I GOING TO MAKE LESS MONEY,
BUT SUDDENLY THE WHOLE LANDSCAPE
FOR INSURANCE WAS CHANGING.
I HAVE TO HAVE INSURANCE.
I HAVE SEVERAL CHRONIC ILLNESSES
THAT I HAVE TO HAVE LAB WORK
EVERY COUPLE OF MONTHS.
AND I SEE, LIKE, THREE DIFFERENT
SPECIALISTS EVERY THREE TO SIX
MONTHS.
>> Reporter: AS THEIR STORE,
PIZZELLE'S CONFECTIONS, OPENED
IN 2013, OBAMACARE BECAME AN
OPTION.
THEY SHOPPED FOR A PLAN ON THE
FEDERAL INSURANCE MARKETPLACE
ESTABLISHED AS PART OF THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
THE SISTERS WERE AMONG THE
98,000 PEOPLE IN ALABAMA WHO
SIGNED UP.
CAITLIN OPTED TO ENROLL WITH
BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD, MICHELLE
WITH HUMANA.
>> IT WAS, YOU KNOW, A LITTLE
BIT OF A HEADACHE TO BEGIN WITH,
BUT I GOT A GOOD SUBSIDY.
IT TURNED OUT TO BE REALLY GOOD
AT THE BEGINNING.
>> Reporter: LIKE 81% OF
OBAMACARE ENROLLEES NATIONWIDE,
THE COST OF THEIR PLANS WAS
OFFSET BY FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
SUBSIDES DETERMINED BY THEIR
INCOME.
AS RECENTLY AS LAST YEAR,
ALABAMA RESIDENTS ENROLLED IN
OBAMACARE HAD THREE PROVIDERS TO
CHOOSE FROM: HUMANA, UNITED
HEALTHCARE AND BLUE CROSS BLUE
SHIELD.
BUT THIS YEAR, ONLY BLUE CROSS
REMAINED, AND IT ALREADY
CONTROLLED MORE THAN 90% OF
ALABAMA'S PRIVATE INSURANCE
MARKET.
BOTH UNITED HEALTHCARE AND
HUMANA CITED THE HIGH COSTS OF
INDIVIDUALS ENROLLED IN THE
MARKETPLACE AS THE REASON FOR
THEIR DEPARTURE.
>> THAT'S WHEN EVERYONE SAW THAT
HUGE JUMP IN PREMIUMS, AND
THAT'S WHEN EVERYONE KIND OF GOT
SCARED AS TO, ARE WE GOING TO
HAVE HEALTH INSURANCE?
ARE WE NOT?
>> Reporter: BLUE CROSS
DECLINED OUR REQUEST FOR
AN INTERVIEW BUT IN A PREVIOUS
STATEMENT SAID RISING PREMIUMS
ARE IN RESPONSE TO THE GREATER
USE OF MEDICAL SERVICES AND
DIMINISHED HEALTH OF
OBAMACARE ENROLLEES.
THIS YEAR, PREMIUMS INCREASED BY
AN AVERAGE OF 39%.
FOR MICHELLE, WHO HAD BEEN WITH
HUMANA, HAVING TO SWITCH TO A
BLUE CROSS PLAN MEANT HER
MONTHLY PREMIUM ROSE SLIGHTLY
FROM $157 TO $167 A MONTH.
CAITLIN, WHO WAS ALREADY ON BLUE
CROSS, WAS FACING A MUCH STEEPER
INCREASE.
SHE SAYS THE PLAN THAT COVERED
HER AND HER HUSBAND WENT FROM
ABOUT $800 TO $1,200 A MONTH.
>> IT WAS MORE THAN OUR MORTGAGE
PAYMENT, AND THERE WAS NO WAY TO
FIT THAT INTO OUR BUDGET.
I DON'T KNOW A LOT OF PEOPLE WHO
HAVE AN EXTRA $1,200 A MONTH TO
SPEND ON JUST THE PREMIUM.
THAT DOESN'T EVEN COUNT ANY OF
THE CO-PAYS AND THE REST OF IT
THAT YOU'RE GOING TO PAY WHEN
YOU SEE THE DOCTOR.
>> Reporter: ALABAMA IS ONE OF
FIVE STATES NOW WITH A SINGLE
INSURANCE PROVIDER THROUGH
OBAMACARE.
AND LIKE ALABAMA, BLUE CROSS
BLUE SHIELD IS EACH STATE'S ONLY
PROVIDER.
SINCE THE BEGINNING OF THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, SUBSIDIES
FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAVE
PLAYED A ROLE IN THE COST OF
INSURANCE PLANS.
DETERMINED BY INDIVIDUAL OR
HOUSEHOLD INCOME, IT HELPS
OFFSET MONTHLY PREMIUMS.
SO, AS CAITLIN AND MICHELLE'S
INCOME ROSE, THE LEVEL OF THEIR
SUBSIDY DECLINED.
ALABAMA HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION
PRESIDENT DON WILLIAMSON LED THE
STATE'S DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
HEALTH AS THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT TOOK EFFECT.
WHAT DOES HEALTHCARE LOOK LIKE
IN ALABAMA WITHIN THE PUBLIC
EXCHANGE MARKET?
>> BLUE CROSS HAS BEEN OUR
DOMINANT INSURANER FOR AN
AWFULLY LONG TIME.
WHERE IT REALLY COMES INTO PLAY
IS WHEN YOU LOOK AT WHAT THE
PREMIUMS AND WHAT THE SUBSIDIES
ARE.
FOR ALABAMA, WE NOW HAVE 178,000
PEOPLE ON OUR EXCHANGE.
OF THOSE 178,000,
90-PLUS-PERCENT OF THEM GET A
SUBSIDY IN THE MARKETPLACE, AND
THAT'S EXTRAORDINARILY
IMPORTANT.
>> Reporter: WILLIAMSON SAYS THE
OBAMACARE SUBSIDIES HAVE KEPT
PACE WITH THE RISE IN PREMIUMS.
THE AVERAGE OUT OF POCKET COST
PER ENROLLEE IN ALABAMA IS NOW
$111 A MONTH.
>> FOR THE 90% THAT ARE GETTING
A SUBSIDY, THE FACT THAT OUR
PREMIUM COST IS HIGHER IS REALLY
NOT A PARTICULAR ISSUE.
WHERE IT BECOMES AN ISSUE IS FOR
THAT 10% THAT DON'T GET A
SUBSIDY.
>> Reporter: LEAVING PEOPLE LIKE
CAITLIN LYON FEELING THE
SQUEEZE.
THE SUBSIDY IS THE ONLY WAY
PEACH FARMER HANK ADCOCK CAN
AFFORD OBAMACARE.
WE VISITED ADCOCK ONE EVENING ON
HIS BIRMINGHAM-AREA FARM,
STARTED BY HIS GRANDFATHER.
THE 62-YEAR-OLD HAD NEVER HAD
HEALTH INSURANCE BEFORE
OBAMACARE.
>> WE COULDN'T AFFORD IT.
FOR ME AND MY WIFE, IT WAS LIKE
$1,600 A MONTH.
>> Reporter: BUT WITH THE
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDY, INSURANCE
FOR HIM AND HIS WIFE COSTS THEM
UNDER $200 A MONTH.
>> IT'S THIS WONDERFUL THING
THAT, TO KNOW THAT IF SOMETHING
MAJOR HAPPENS TO ME, I CAN GO TO
THE HOSPITAL, THEY CAN WORK ON
ME AND, YOU KNOW, TRY TO FIX ME.
>> Reporter: SOMETHING MAJOR DID
HAPPEN TO ADCOCK A FEW MONTHS
AFTER ENROLLING.
HIS HAND GOT STUCK IN A HAY
BALER, CUTTING OFF TWO OF HIS
FINGERS.
THE MEDEVAC HELICOPTER AND
HOSPITAL BILL WAS $111,000, BUT
HIS INSURANCE PLAN COVERED IT.
>> I WAS INSURED.
IF I HADN'T, I MEAN, I'D HAVE
LOST THE FARM.
I COULDN'T HAVE PAID THE BILLS,
YOU KNOW.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY WOULD'VE
DONE.
I CAN'T COMPLAIN ABOUT BLUE
CROSS BLUE SHIELD.
YOU CAN'T BEAT IT.
>> Reporter: ADCOCK ALSO
REPRESENTS ANOTHER COMPLICATED
PIECE OF ALABAMA'S INSURANCE
PUZZLE-- THE STATE'S DECISION TO
NOT EXPAND MEDICAID DURING THE
ADOPTION OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT.
ALABAMA IS ONE OF 19 STATES THAT
REJECTED THE MEDICAID EXPANSION.
HOW MUCH DO THINK ALABAMA'S
DECISION TO NOT EXPAND MEDICAID
HAS INFLUENCED THE CURRENT
PLAYING FIELD?
>> WHAT YOU'VE DONE IS, YOU'VE
NOW PUT PEOPLE ON THE EXCHANGE
IN ALABAMA WHO, IN A STATE THAT
EXPANDED MEDICAID, WOULD NOT BE
ON THE EXCHANGE.
AND TO THE EXTENT THAT, BECAUSE
THEY HAVE A LOWER INCOME, AND
THEY MAY HAVE HIGHER UNDERLYING
CONDITIONS, YOU'VE CREATED A
LESS HEALTHY POOL OVER WHICH YOU
HAVE TO SPREAD RISK, WHICH MAY
CONTRIBUTE TO SOME OF THE HIGHER
PREMIUMS.
>> Reporter: AND THOSE THAT HAVE
NEITHER OBAMACARE NOR MEDICAID
DIRECTLY AFFECT ALABAMA'S
HOSPITALS.
DAVID SPILLERS IS C.E.O. OF THE
HUNTSVILLE HOSPITAL HEALTH
SYSTEM, WHICH RUNS SEVERAL
DIFFERENT HOSPITALS ACROSS
NORTHERN ALABAMA.
FROM THE HOSPITAL'S PERSPECTIVE,
WERE YOU DISTRESSED WHEN ALABAMA
DECIDED NOT TO EXPAND MEDICAID?
>> CLEARLY, I WAS DISAPPOINTED.
THE BLOCK OF PEOPLE WHO WOULD
HAVE QUALIFIED FOR SOME TYPE OF
INSURANCE UNDER THE EXPANSION IS
A LARGE NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN THE
STATE OF ALABAMA.
THOSE PEOPLE HAVING INSURANCE
WOULD SIGNIFICANTLY HELP
PROVIDERS LIKE US WHO ARE
PROVIDING HEALTHCARE BUT NOT
GETTING PAID FOR IT.
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH OF A HIT
WAS THAT FOR THE HOSPITAL?
>> WELL, IT, THE HIT WAS-- LAST
YEAR, OUR COST OF FREE CARE WAS
ABOUT $65 MILLION.
NOW, NOT ALL OF THAT WOULD'VE
BEEN COVERED HAD WE EXPANDED
MEDICAID, BUT A PORTION OF THAT
WOULD'VE BEEN COVERED.
I MEAN, EVERY, EVERY BIT HELPS.
>> Reporter: THERE'S LONG BEEN A
DISCUSSION THAT IF THE NUMBER OF
INSURERS WERE TO INCREASE, COSTS
COULD COME DOWN.
DO YOU THINK THAT'S A FAIR
ASSESSMENT?
>> I DON'T THINK THAT HAVING TWO
OR THREE MORE INSURANCE
COMPANIES IN THE STATE OF
ALABAMA IS IMMEDIATELY GOING TO
CHANGE THE LANDSCAPE.
AND THE REASON IS, BLUE CROSS OF
ALABAMA IS SO LARGE, AND THEY
NEGOTIATE RATES SO LOW WITH US,
IT'S HARD FOR US TO GO GIVE
THOSE RATES TO SOMEBODY ELSE.
>> Reporter: SONJA SMITH HELPS
RESIDENTS SIGN UP FOR OBAMACARE
AS A PROJECT COORDINATOR FOR
"ENROLL ALABAMA."
SHE AGREES WITH SPILLERS THAT
HAVING A SINGLE INSURER ON THE
PUBLIC EXCHANGE HAS NOT
DRASTICALLY CHANGED THE
INSURANCE MARKETPLACE.
>> I NEVER HEARD ANYONE SAY,
"OH, I WISH I HAD MORE OPTIONS."
HAVING A LIMITED NUMBER OF
PLANS, WE ACTUALLY FOUND IT
EASIER, BECAUSE WE WERE BETTER
ABLE TO DO A SIDE-BY-SIDE
COMPARISON FOR PEOPLE, FOR THEM
TO REALLY SEE, "OKAY, WELL, THIS
IS WHAT WORKS FOR ME AND THIS IS
WHAT DOESN'T."
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK THAT
IF THERE WERE MORE OPTIONS, IF
THERE WERE MORE PLANS, BECAUSE
THERE WERE MORE INSURERS, THAT
THE PRICES WOULD, WOULD COME
DOWN?
>> I CAN'T NECESSARILY SAY THAT
IT WOULD MAKE THAT MUCH OF A
DIFFERENCE.
>> Reporter: IN THE END, CAITLIN
AND MICHELLE FOUND WORKAROUNDS.
MICHELLE, A NEWLYWED AS OF THIS
PAST MONTH, IS NOW ON HER
HUSBAND'S PLAN, OFFERED THROUGH
HIS EMPLOYER; WHILE CAITLIN
PURCHASED A GROUP PLAN WITH TWO
EMPLOYEES, BRINGING HER AND HER
HUSBAND'S MONTHLY PREMIUM DOWN
TO $645 A MONTH.
I FEEL LIKE YOUR STORY
ENCAPSULATES HEALTHCARE IN
AMERICA.
YOU'VE GOT A GROWING SMALL
BUSINESS, AND THIS HEADWIND THAT
AFFORDABLE CARE AND INSURANCE
HAS PUT ON YOU IS TREMENDOUS.
>> HEALTHCARE SEEMS OVERLY
COMPLICATED IN THE UNITED STATES
RIGHT NOW.
IT'S NOT OKAY THAT PEOPLE SHOULD
HAVE TO MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT
JOBS, OR THEIR BUSINESS, OR
THESE BIG DECISIONS, BASED ON
WHETHER OR NOT THEY'RE GOING TO
BE ABLE TO AFFORD TO GO TO THE
DOCTOR.
MANY OF OUR EMPLOYEES, MOST OF
THEM GET SUBSIDIES THROUGH THE
MARKETPLACE, BECAUSE IT'S A
BETTER DEAL EVEN THAN GETTING A
GROUP RATE THROUGH OUR BUSINESS.
AND THESE ARE REAL PEOPLE WITH
REAL PROBLEMS, WHO HAVE TO THINK
ABOUT INSURANCE, LIKE, EVERY
DAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A 12-PERSON
CANOE PADDLED HOME TO HAWAII
TODAY AFTER A THREE-YEAR TRIP
AROUND THE WORLD.
READ MORE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: TRUCK DRIVERS
ARE A CRUCIAL LINK IN THE SUPPLY
CHAIN OF GETTING IMPORTED GOODS
FROM PORTS TO STORES.
AN INVESTIGATIVE REPORT BY "USA
TODAY" SHOWS THOSE DRIVERS WORK
LONG HOURS FOR LOW PAY WHILE
BEING HEAVILY IN DEBT FROM
LEASING THEIR TRUCKS.
THE STORY, "RIGGED," PUBLISHED
YESTERDAY, RECOUNTS HOW AT LEAST
140 TRUCK COMPANIES IN SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA HAVE BEEN ACCUSED OF
LABOR VIOLATIONS, AND FORCING
TRUCKERS INTO WORKING CONDITIONS
AKIN TO INDENTURED SERVITUDE.
THE ARTICLE'S AUTHOR, BRETT
MURPHY, JOINS ME FROM NAPLES,
FLORIDA, TO DISCUSS THIS STORY.
TELL US WHAT'S HAPPENING TO
THESE TRUCKERS?
>> WELL, THE COMPANIES FOUND A
LOOPHOLE IN THE LABOR LAW.
BY CALLING THESE GUYS
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS INSTEAD
OF EMPLOYEES, NO REAL RULES
APPLY.
THEY CAN KIND OF DO WHATEVER
THEY WANT-- OR THEY THINK THEY
CAN.
SO, WHAT THEY'VE BEEN ABLE TO DO
WAS SORT OF FIND A LARGE
POPULATION OF TRUCK DRIVERS,
MOSTLY IMMIGRANTS, ABOUT 16,000
IMMIGRANT DRIVERS.
AND WHEN THE STATE TOLD THESE
COMPANIES THAT THEY HAD TO USE
NEWER, CLEANER TRUCKS, INSTEAD
OF PAYING FOR IT THEMSELVES,
THEY CAME UP WITH THIS IDEA OF
LEASE-TO-OWN CONTRACTS,
LEASE-TO-OWN AGREEMENTS.
AND WHEN THE DRIVERS CAME INTO
WORK ONE DAY, JUST LIKE THEY HAD
BEEN FOR DECADES, THE COMPANY
SAID, "IF YOU WANT TO KEEP YOUR
JOB HERE, IF YOU WANT TO KEEP
DRIVING, YOU NEED TO SIGN THIS
CONTRACT."
THEY DIDN'T TRANSLATE IT.
THEY DIDN'T EXPLAIN IT.
AND THE GUYS THOUGHT THAT THEY
WOULD JUST BE GETTING A NEW
TRUCK AFTER FIVE OR SEVEN YEARS,
AND IF THEY WORKED HARD, THEY'D
GET GOOD PAY, JUST LIKE THEY'D
ALWAYS HAD.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, THERE'S
NOTHING WRONG WITH INHERENTLY
THE LEASE-TO-OWN MODEL.
THAT HAPPENS EVERYWHERE.
HOW ARE THESE DRIVERS BEING
TAKEN ADVANTAGE OF?
>> BECAUSE THEY OWE MONEY TO
THEIR BOSS EVERY WEEK, THE
COMPANIES USE THAT AS SORT OF A
CONSTANT THREAT OF PUNISHMENT OR
RETALIATION.
SO, FOR INSTANCE, IF THEY DON'T
WANT TO WORK 14 OR 16 HOURS, THE
BOSS MIGHT SAY, "WELL, THEN, YOU
CAN'T WORK TOMORROW."
SO, THEY USE IT AS A CONTROL TO
MAKE THEM WORK AROUND THE CLOCK.
WE ARE LOOKING AT GUYS DOING 100
HOURS A WEEK, 120 HOURS A WEEK.
AND EVEN IF THE PAY IS SO BAD
THAT THEY'RE TAKING HOME PENNIES
ON THE HOUR, THEY HAVE NO CHOICE
BUT TO SAY YES.
IF THEY FALL BEHIND, FOR
INSTANCE, ON A WEEK, THE DEBT
CARRIES OVER TO THE NEXT WEEK.
AND THEY CAN ACTUALLY OWE THEIR
BOSS MONEY COME FRIDAY.
AND WE SAW CASES WHERE GUYS
WOULD COME HOME AFTER DOUBLE
SHIFTS-- 16, 18 HOURS A DAY--
THEY WOULD TRY TO GO HOME, YOU
KNOW, BACK TO THEIR FAMILIES,
THEY WERE TIRED.
AND THE BOSS WOULD ACTUALLY LOCK
THE GATES TO THE PARKING LOT AND
SAY, "NO, YOU NEED TO GO BACK.
YOU NEED TO GO BACK ON TO THE
ROAD AND DELIVER MORE
CONTAINERS."
SO, THEY'RE CONSTANTLY IN THESE
SITUATIONS WHERE THEY HAVE
REALLY NO AGENCY OR OPTIONS.
THEY CAN'T TAKE THE TRUCK AND GO
WORK FOR SOMEBODY ELSE.
THEY'RE REALLY TIED TO IT.
THEIR WHOLE INVESTMENT GETS TIED
UP INTO THIS TRUCK.
THEY WENT BANKRUPT, HOUSES GOT
FORECLOSED ON, ALL BECAUSE THEY
WERE POURING THEIR LIFE SAVINGS
INTO THIS THING THAT THEY REALLY
NEVER QUALIFIED FOR TO BEGIN
WITH.
THEY DIDN'T HAVE THE
CREDITWORTHINESS.
THAT'S WHAT THE COMPANIES KNEW
WHEN THEY WERE DRAWING UP THE
AGREEMENTS, AND THAT'S WHY THEY
STEPPED IN TO KIND OF BE THE
MIDDLE MAN.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN YOU SAY
WORKING DOUBLE SHIFTS AND
120 HOURS A WEEK SOMETIMES,
AREN'T THERE RULES IN THE
TRUCKING INDUSTRY THAT PREVENT
TRUCKERS FROM WORKING TOO MANY
HOURS SO THAT THEY'RE STILL
ALERT BEHIND THE WHEEL?
>> EXACTLY, YEAH.
A DRIVER IS ONLY SUPPOSED TO BE
DRIVING FOR 11 HOURS IN A SINGLE
DAY.
WE'RE LOOKING AT GUYS WHO ARE
ALMOST DOING DOUBLE THAT.
AND WHAT THEY'RE DOING IS THEY
COOK THEIR LOG BOOKS.
THEY DOCTOR THEIR MANIFESTS.
AND A LOT OF THE COMPANIES NOT
ONLY KNOW THAT THEIR DRIVERS ARE
DOING THAT, BUT THEY REQUIRE IT.
WE FOUND INSTANCES OF
DISPATCHERS WITHHOLDING
PAYCHECKS UNTIL DRIVERS DOCTORED
THEIR LOG BOOKS.
WE HAD MANAGERS WHO WERE
ACTUALLY SHOWING THEM HOW TO DO
IT EVERY FRIDAY.
AND IT'S REALLY ILLEGAL, AND
IT'S REALLY DANGEROUS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, SO
THE GOODS THAT ARE BEING
TRANSPORTED BY THESE TRUCKS ARE
MAKING THEIR WAY INTO MOST OF
THE STORES THAT WE'RE FAMILIAR
WITH AND WE SHOP AT.
WHEN YOU ASK THOSE STORES
WHETHER THEY KNEW THIS WAS
HAPPENING AND HOW THESE GOODS
GET TO THEIR SHELVES, WHAT DO
THEY SAY?
>> BECAUSE THEY DON'T HIRE THESE
GUYS DIRECTLY-- THEY OFTEN HIRE
SHIPPING COMPANIES, OR LOGISTICS
COMPANIES THAT HANDLE ALL THIS--
THEY DIDN'T REALLY WANT TO
COMMENT.
THEY DIDN'T THINK IT WAS THEIR
PLACE, WHICH IS, OF COURSE, AN
ARGUMENT THEY TRIED USING IN THE
PAST WITH A LOT OF THEIR
FACTORIES OVERSEAS.
BUT WHAT THEY WERE SAYING,
REALLY, WAS THAT WE EXPECT ALL
OF OUR VENDORS AND CONTRACTORS
TO ADHERE TO THE LAWS.
WE HAVE OUR CODE OF ETHICS.
WE WANT EVERYONE TO FOLLOW IT.
BUT AS FAR AS, YOU KNOW, WHAT I
HEARD, A LOT OF THE TIMES, THIS
WAS NEWS TO THEM.
AND, THEREFORE, THEY DIDN'T
THINK THEY REALLY WERE IN A
PLACE TO COMMENT ON IT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
BRETT MURPHY OF THE "USA TODAY."
THE STORY IS ONLINE RIGHT NOW.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> HEY, THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: RETURNING TO THE
MISTRIAL IN THE SEXUAL ASSAULT
TRIAL OF BILL COSBY, "WASHINGTON
POST" REPORTER MANUEL ROIG-
FRANZIA JOINS ME FROM
PHILADELPHIA.
HOW DID THE DEFENSE TEAM DO IT?
>> THE DEFENSE TEAM REALLY DID
IT THROUGH CROSS-EXAMINATION.
THEY POUNDED ON THE
INCONSISTENCIES IN ANDREA
CONSTAND'S STATEMENTS THAT SHE
MADE TO POLICE, THE DATES THAT
SHE GOT WRONG AND THEN HAD TO
LATER CORRECT.
AND THE SCENARIOS THAT STARTED
OUT ONE WAY WHEN SHE TALKED TO
POLICE AND ENDED UP ANOTHER.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WAS ALSO
INTERESTING IN THAT WHO WAS NOT
THERE.
BILL COSBY DIDN'T TESTIFY IN
HIS OWN DEFENSE AND THERE ARE
OTHER PEOPLE WHO HAVE ACCUSED
COSBY IN THE PAST THAT WERE IN
THE STANDS BUT DIDN'T TESTIFY.
>> THE PROSECUTOR WANTED TO HAVE
13 PREVIOUS ACCUSERS OF BILL
COSBY'S TO TAKE THE STAND IN
THIS CASE.
THAT MIGHT HAVE HAD THE EFFECT
OF REALLY FLOODING THE ZONE,
TELLING THE JURY THAT EVEN IF
YOU HAVE SOME QUESTIONS ABOUT
ANDREA CONSTAND'S STATEMENTS,
THAT THERE'S JUST SUCH AN
OVERWHELMING NUMBER OF OTHER
WOMEN THAT YOU JUST WOULD HAVE
TO BELIEVE HER.
INSTEAD, THE JUDGE ONLY ALLOWED
ONE OTHER PREVIOUS ACCUSER.
AND AT THE END OF THE DAY, THAT
MIGHT HAVE HAD SOME EFFECT IN
GIVING THE UNCERTAINTY TO THE
JURY THAT LED THEM TO THIS
MISTRIAL.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF COSBY'S
SPOKESMEN CAME OUT KIND OF
JUBILANTLY AND SAID HIS
REPUTATION IS BACK, BUT HE'S NOT
OUT OF THE WOODS YET.
>> NO, HE'S ABSOLUTELY NOT OUT
OF THE WOODS.
THE PROSECUTOR, KEVIN STEELE,
DISTRICT ATTORNEY IN MONTGOMERY
COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, WITHOUT
HESITATION SAID THAT HE'S GOING
TO RETRY THIS CASE.
AND I LOOKED OVER AT THE DEFENSE
TABLE.
I WAS JUST A FEW STEPS AWAY, AND
THERE'S BILL COSBY BY HIMSELF,
HANDS ON HIS FACE, LOOKING DOWN
AT THE GROUND.
AT THAT MOMENT, I THOUGHT, THIS
IS A MAN WHO IS COMPLETELY
ALONE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MANUEL ROIG-FRANZIA OF THE
"WASHINGTON POST," THANKS SO
MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, THE
TRUMPS ARE SPENDING THEIR FIRST
NIGHT AT CAMP DAVID.
THE PRESIDENT, FIRST LADY, AND
THEIR SON, BARRON, TOOK OFF FOR
THE 125-ACRE, NAVY-RUN RETREAT
IN THE MARYLAND MOUNTAINS THIS
MORNING.
MR. TRUMP IS THE 14th PRESIDENT,
STARTING WITH F.D.R., TO VISIT
CAMP DAVID, WHICH HAS TENNIS
COURTS, A POOL, A BOWLING ALLEY,
A MOVIE THEATER, AND A SINGLE
GOLF HOLE.
THIS COMES AMID CRITICISM OVER
THE COST OF HIS FREQUENT WEEKEND
VISITS, AT INCREASED TAXPAYER
EXPENSE, TO TRUMP PROPERTIES IN
FLORIDA, NEW JERSEY, AND
VIRGINIA.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.